Making decisions can be a daunting task, particularly when the stakes are high. Fortunately, there are strategies and tools available to guide decision-makers through the process. One such tool is the weighted pros and cons list, which was popularized by none other than Benjamin Franklin. In this article, we will explore how a systematic approach to decision-making, utilizing Franklin's simple pros and cons tool, can lead to better outcomes. We will examine the steps involved in this approach, highlight the benefits of this method, and provide examples of how it can be applied in various contexts. By the end of this article, readers will have a greater understanding of how to make great decisions using a systematic approach, and the confidence to apply this knowledge in their own decision-making processes.

## Background

Benjamin Franklin is one of the most well-known figures in American history, with his life and achievements having a significant impact on both the United States and the world. Born in Boston in 1706, Franklin was a man of many talents, excelling in areas such as printing, writing, science, and diplomacy. He is best known for his role in American politics and his contributions to the development of American society, such as his invention of the lightning rod and the bifocal lens.

However, Franklin's contributions extend beyond his inventions and political leadership. He was also a keen observer of human behavior, and his writings on decision making and problem-solving have had a lasting impact on the field of decision theory. Franklin developed a method for making decisions known as the pros and cons list, in which he would weigh the potential advantages and disadvantages of a particular choice. This method has become a staple in decision-making processes, and its effectiveness has been proven time and again.

## Ben Franklin's Pros & Cons Decision Method

Ben Franklin was a close friend of Joseph Priestley in the 1700s, who was himself a chemist, political theorist, educator amongst other things. As trusted friends, Ben Franklin and Joseph Priestley exchanged ideas throughout the years on many ideas. In the summer of 1772, via a letter Joseph Priestley sought advice from Ben Franklin about a high-stakes decision he had to make. Priestley had a decision to make between relinquishing his position as the minister of the fame Unitarian church Mill Hill Chapel in Leeds or accepting a very desireable position as the general assistant to the Earl of Shelburne. Rather than providing an opinion on which option to select, Ben Franklin responded to Priestley by teaching him how to make a decision using a systematic process! 

Below is the actual letter Ben Franklin wrote in 1772 detailing the process to his friend Joseph Priestley:  
>When these difficult Cases occur, they are difficult chiefly because while we have them under Consideration all the Reasons pro and con are not present to the Mind at the same time; but sometimes one Set present themselves, and at other times another, the first being out of Sight. Hence the various Purposes or Inclinations that alternately prevail, and the Uncertainty that perplexes us.

>To get over this, my Way is, to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two Columns, writing over the one Pro, and over the other Con. Then during three or four Days Consideration I put down under the different Heads short Hints of the different Motives that at different Times occur to me for or against the Measure. When I have thus got them all together in one View, I endeavour to estimate their respective Weights; and where I find two, one on each side, that seem equal, I strike them both out: If I find a Reason pro equal to some two Reasons con, I strike out the three. If I judge some two Reasons con equal to some three Reasons pro, I strike out the five; and thus proceeding I find at length where the Ballance lies; and if after a Day or two of farther Consideration nothing new that is of Importance occurs on either side, I come to a Determination accordingly.

>And tho’ the Weight of Reasons cannot be taken with the Precision of Algebraic Quantities, yet when each is thus considered separately and comparatively, and the whole lies before me, I think I can judge better, and am less likely to take a rash Step; and in fact I have found great Advantage from this kind of Equation, in what may be called Moral or Prudential Algebra.

The above letter was written over 250 years ago and sounds quite different the way current letters are written. In summary these are the steps Ben Franklin recommends when making a decision, which he called his "Decision Making Method of Moral Algebra":  
- Frame a decison that has two options (Yes or a No)
- Divide an area into two competing halves: a "Pro" side and "Con" side
- Label the top of one side "Pro" (for) and the other "Con" (against)
- Under each respective side, over a period of time (Ben Frankklin recommended days, this could be minutes) write down various reasons/arguments that support (Pro) or are against (Con) the decision
- After spending some time thinking exhaustively and writing down the reasons, weight the different Pro and Con reasons/arguments
- Determine the relative imporance of each reason or argument. This is done by taking reasons/arguments that are of similar value (weight) and crossing them off of the other competing half. Multiple reasons can be combined from one side to form a "subjective" value (weight) to balance out the other half. (For example, two medium "Pro" reasons might add up to an equal value of a single important "Con" reason)
- The side with the most remaining reasons is the option one should select for the decision in question

## Example

## Why This Simple 250 Year Old Decision Making Method Matters

Many sophisticated decision support systems or management systems use big data, artificial intelligence, statistical probabilities or confidence interval ranges. Ben Franklin's decision making method is not meant to replace any of those as it is quite inferior. However, in my opinion this method still matters! Why? Most people in their personal lives or even in business context do not use a systematic or organized reasoning process at all!! Even important or high-stakes decisions are made using "past expertise" or "gut feel". Humans have selective recall, are influenced by recent events and even will make a different decision presented with the same information depending on their "mood"! Most decisions are heavily biased, indivuals naturally have preferences and prefer one alternative to another. There is nothing wrong with having a preference. However, there needs to be a discipline imposed in order to overcome biases and personal preferences. 

A simple decision-making process, such as creating a pro and con list, is better than having no decision-making process because it introduces structure and organization to the decision-making task. This logical approach aims to minimize the impact of human limitations on decision-making. Ben Frankklin's 250 year-old method encourages individuals to consider multiple aspects of a decision, including potential benefits and drawbacks. Thinking of reasons against an individual's preference forces the person to think of reasons that were not on their mind. By examining both positive and negative factors, decision-makers can gain a clearer understanding of the implications of their choices, which can lead to more informed and balanced decisions.

If you are currently making important high-stakes decisions not using any organized process, look to Ben Franklin's decision making method. It is a simple technique that can be highly effective to ensure a balanced review in your decsion reasoning process.
